.. _dark-mode:

========================
Dark Mode User Interface
========================

.. versionadded:: 1.6

Dark mode is a user interface design style that uses a dimmed and dark color theme for elements. It
is considered "night-friendly" because it reduces screen glare. In low-light environments,
activating **dark mode** can help reduce eye strain from bright screens. This is why **dark mode**
has become a popular feature on many websites, allowing users to switch from the standard "light
theme" whenever they prefer.

**django-formset** added support for **dark mode** in version 1.6. There are two different
approaches for switching to dark mode. One is by using the browser's built-in dark mode feature.
This typically is a system-wide setting that can be activated in your operating system. The other
is by adding a special icon to the user interface of the website that allows to switch between light
and dark mode.

For web developers there is a third option, in the DevTools of your Chrome browser, click the three
dots menu and select "Rendering", then activate the checkbox labeled "Enable auto dark mode". In
Firefox one can switch to dark mode by clicking on the moon icon when examining the styles of an
HTML element. Switching the color scheme using the DevTools of your browser is like changing it in
the settings of your operating system. Usually however, a website should provide a way to switch
between light and dark mode.

**django-formset** does not provide any helpers for switching between light and dark mode. This
feature is left to the developer of the website but usually is provided by the CSS framework used
for the website. For example, **Bootstrap 5** understands the special attribute ``data-bs-theme``
added to the ``<body>`` element. This attribute can have the values ``auto``, ``light``, or
``dark``. When set to ``auto``, the operating system's dark mode setting is respected. When set to
``light`` or ``dark`` mode, that mode is enforced. This page for instance offers a button to switch
between auto, light and dark mode. It is located in the top right corner of the page.

Components provided by the **django-formset** library adopt themselves to the styling of the used
CSS framework. This means that when the website switches to dark mode, these components must also
switch to dark mode. This is achieved by using CSS variables that are set to different values
depending on the color scheme. For instance, in Bootstrap the color of the text is set to
``var(--bs-body-bg)`` which is either white or a dark grey. Whenever a mode switch occurs, an event
handler intercepts this and reevaluates the styles of the given native HTML element and then applies
them to the given web component implementing the widget.

In **django-formset**, dark mode settings provided by the operating system work out of the box and
without the need to change any JavaScript code or to add additional CSS rules to the website's CSS
files, if the used CSS framework supports it. This is the case for **Bootstrap 5**. If a manual
dark mode switcher is desired, the only thing to take care of is to ensure that the ``<body>``
element contains an attribute containing the substring "theme". Valid attributes for instance are
``data-theme`` (used by Sphinx), ``theme`` or ``data-bs-theme`` (used by Bootstrap). This attribute
must contain the value of the actual theme, it is observed by this library and whenever it changes,
the styles of the web components are updated accordingly.
